---
layout: paper
title: Deciphering “ongoing” cognition using concurrent multimodal neuroimaging and continuous multitask paradigm
image: /images/projects/semfni.png
ref: 2016-2018
authors: 
funding: Department Innovator Award, Stanford
aims: 

done: false

---

### Aims
Brain activity at rest, initially thought to be “noise”, is currently argued to be of critical import for brain functioning1. Recent functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) studies often measure brain’s activity at rest by focusing on the spatial patterns of blood-oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal co- fluctuations that are recorded in the absence of any externally driven tasks or stimulation. These spatially co-fluctuating patterns (aka functional connectivity; FC) are usually computed over the entire scan-time (5-10min) and have cognitive significance1, long-term reproducibility2, and a potential for clinical significance3. However, averaging over entire scan-time and ignoring temporal variations in FC result only in an “average” snapshot; as the FC is recently shown to be highly dynamic at much faster time-scales4 (in seconds). Thus, the field is now directed towards capturing the dynamics or transitions in quasi-stable FC configurations (or states), with an ultimate aim of using these rich dynamics to create disorder- centric and precision-medicine biomarkers. Thus, looking forward, rapid transitions might characterize disorders with impaired attention, while “fixed- states” might indicate internal ruminations most characteristic of depressive or anxiety disorders. Despite the recent focus to quantify the dynamics of FC patterns†, one of the biggest barriers in advancing this research is the lack of gold-standard neuroimaging data with known ground truth, regarding timing and nature of transitions during ongoing cognition. Here, we propose to address this knowledge gap by collecting multimodal (electroencephalogram (EEG) and fMRI) sub-second neuroimaging data while participants engage in a novel Continuous Multitask Experimental (CME) paradigm. Using behavioral performance at each trial and trial-by-trial time-locked variation in FC, the CME paradigm will allow us to directly examine the role of FC dynamics in ongoing adaptive cognition, thereby leading the way for developing clinically meaningful biomarkers.

### Highlights

- Studied neurobehavioral basis of creativity thinking during middle childhood.
- Using data-driven methods, revealed three trajectories of creativity development.
- Functional segregation of right frontal regions tracked creativity development.
- Heightened (normative) externalizing behavior was associated with creativity.

### Presentations/Papers
1. Saggar, M., Xie, H., Beaty, R. E., Stankov, A.D., Schreier, M., Reiss, A.L. (2019) <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.03.080"> Creativity slumps and bumps: examining neurobehavioral basis of creativity development during middle childhood.</a> <strong> NeuroImage </strong> 


### Press


### Funding
A postdoctoral fellowship from the Stanford Maternal & Child Health Research Institute (MCHRI) to M.S.
