---
layout: paper
title: Quantifying changes in brain dynamics associated with non-invasive brain stimulation
image: /images/projects/nibs.png
ref: 2020-2024
authors: Saggar M, Williams N, Spiegel D, Etkin A, Sun Y
funding: NIMH
aims: Using a series of projects, we aim to develop computational methods to quantify changes in brain dynamics associated with non-invasive brain stimulation (NIBS).
done: false

---

### Aims

Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) facilitates controlled, non-invasive, modulation of the brain by modifying local brain activity and has the potential to examine recruitment, activation and coordination of cortical networks in health and disease. To optimize the application of TMS, e.g., for precision medicine, it is important to first carefully characterize the stimulation-induced changes in spatiotemporal dynamics. To this end, using concurrent TMS-fMRI(EEG), we are examining stimulation-induced changes in brain dynamics and functional organization associated different stimulation sites. 


### Highlights
- We recently examined changes in 

### Presentations/Papers
1. Jiang, J., Saggar, M., Narayan, M., Zhang, Y., Wu, W., Mills-Finnerty, C., Cole, M.W., Etkin, A. (under-review), TMS-induced activation spreads throughout the brain via intrinsic functional networks.
2. Saggar, M., Jiang, J, Mills-Finnerty, C., Wright, R., Cornelssen, C., Etkin, A. (2019). Studying stimulation-site-based changes in brain activity using TMS/fMRI & topological data analysis. Organization of Human Brain Mapping (HBM) Annual Meeting, 2019, Rome, Italy. 

### Funding
The data used in this project was collected due to the support of multiple NIMH grants to Drs. Spiegel, Williams and Etkin.