---
layout: paper
title: The topology of time - transition networks in simulated and real neural dynamics
image: /images/papers/tmapper.png
authors: Zhang M., Chowdhury S., Saggar M.
year: 2022
ref: Zhang, M., Chowdhury, S., Saggar M. (2022) BioRxiv
journal: "BioRxiv"
doi: 10.1101/2022.07.28.501877
github:
pdf: /pdfs/papers/tmapper.pdf
---

# Abstract
Characterizing large-scale dynamic organization of the brain relies on both descriptive and mechanistic modeling. The former often uses the language of statistical dependency, and the latter uses that of dynamical systems. The conceptual translation between the two is not straightforward. The present work aims to provide a conceptual bridge between descriptive and mechanistic modeling via a computational framework. In particular, we focus on fMRI-based and -targeted modeling of large-scale brain dynamics in humans. We conceptualize brain dynamics as a complex landscape continuously modulated by internal and external changes (e.g., arousal level, task conditions). The modulation can induce transitions between one stable brain state (attractor) to another. We provide a method to retrieve the network of transitions between relevant attractors from time-series data alone. For theoretical validation of our approach, we first use a biophysical network model to induce transitions in a controlled manner, which provides simulated time series equipped with a ground-truth attractor transition network. Building on existing works in the field of Topological Data Analysis, we develop a computational tool, named the Temporal Mapper, that reconstructs the ground-truth transition network from simulated time-series data better than existing time-varying approaches. For empirical relevance, we later apply our Temporal Mapper approach to human fMRI data gathered during a continuous multitask experiment. We found that occupancy of the high-degree nodes and cycles of the transition network was significantly associated with subjects' behavioral performance. Taken together, we provide an important first step towards integrating descriptive and mechanistic modeling of brain dynamics.
